Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of
the Center. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lob
. And today I'm joined by Dr Nicholas Brown.
He's a researcher at Linnaeus University in Sweden. He
works on developing new research methods in psychology and on
applying meta scientific perspectives on psychology as a. And
today we're going to go through topics like conceptual and
methodological issues in positive psychology and the study of well
being. And then we're going to go through a
few other studies, psychology related studies to talk about
examples of bad science. And then we're also going
to talk a little bit about where bad science stems
from and how we can deal with it. So
, Doctor Brown, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone. Thank you for inviting me
. It's always uh always interesting to talk about what
I'm doing. OK. So let's start here with
a positive psychology and the study of the determinants of
well being. So, uh first of all,
tell us a little bit about how you got interested
in this subject specifically and then we can get into
some of the issues you found there. Well,
until 2009, I was a, I was a
computer guy and I was a manager in an IT
department. And then in what I like to call
a terrible administrative mix up, I got moved to
the HR department. Uh, and since my,
my bachelor's in computer science had served me well for
the previous 28 years in it, I thought that
maybe I should get some kind of, uh,
formal training in something to do with people, which
was, you know, never II I like to
think I was a good pragmatic manager, but I
had no theory. And um due to a chance
encounter uh with Professor Richard, Professor Richard Wiseman,
who was a sort of fairly well known uh British
uh psychologist Piers in the media. And, and
he mentioned, I I asked him whether there was
kind of any um science that could help with,
um particularly when you work in a large organization,
uh your, your human resources department sends you on
training courses to teach you to be a less bad
manager and things like that. And uh and it
seemed to me this was my, in my new
job buying, buying in those services was part of
my responsibility and it seemed to me that it was
all a bit hand wavy. So I asked Professor
Wiseman, you know, if there's any kind of
theory there? And he said, well, there
is this sub sub. Now he could have mentioned
the good old fashioned, uh, organizational and,
uh, and industrial io psychology. Or he could
have mentioned, you know, management schools, schools
, but he mentioned this. He said his new
field called Positive Psychology. They have a Masters at
the University of East London. And it's quite funny
because, like, I think a lot of people
I have a recurring, or I had a recurring
nightmare, which is that it was three weeks until
my school leaving exams. But I had my present
knowledge, uh, of the subject matter. Um
, and so I didn't imagine in a million years
that I'd be going back to school. But there
, I was at the age of 50 doing this
masters in something called applied positive psychology. And I
had this very naive view of what psychology could teach
us about anything. So, in, in 2011
, yeah, I couldn't have named you three living
psychologists. Uh, for example, uh, so
I had a, you know, that was a
quick, that was a fast introduction to psychology in
general. I had no, absolutely no background,
uh, positive psychology and, um, as,
as part of a, a taught master's program with
a little bit of a research project tacked onto the
end of it. But, um, that was
how I, I got into that. Um,
and about halfway through it was a two year masters
, the opportunity came up to take early retirement.
So I left paid employment in the end of June
2012 and decided to see what would turn up in
terms of things to interest me. And since then
I finished the masters, uh I spent a year
in a psychotherapy school where I learned that I would
be AAA pretty poor psychotherapist. And um then I
got a, I got a chance to be on
a phd program uh using some of the critical stuff
that I was writing about positive psychology and then psychology
in general. And more recently, my work has
gone into um bad science and up to and including
fraudulent science and in psychology and areas beyond. Um
but the, the kinds of analyses I do are
more suited to uh social science type uh situations.
Although I also do work on that in things like
biomedical, some biomedical fields. So there's the whole
, the whole spectrum of the science reform movement from
doing things a bit better up to doing less fraud
is, is roughly where I am today. But
I, I, yeah, I, I started
off critiquing uh positive psychology both kind of somewhat theoretically
although, you know, I don't have the psychological
background to really, you know, heavily critique every
single construct in terms of the history of the literature
. Um and, and, and also pragmatically and
, and experimental. OK. But uh tell us
a bit about that. What were some of the
main conceptual and methodological issues you, you found in
positive psychology and the study of well being? Well
, what I found coming from the outside was uh
and I mean, maybe this is a criticism of
just how psychology works in general. But I,
I know there are people within psychology who talk about
this is what are we measuring? And how are
we saying that things are better or, or,
or, or what is well being? How do
you measure well-being? And it seems to me you
can get psychologists to agree among themselves occasionally that something
is a measure of well-being. But whether or not
that actually relates to what ordinary individuals would talk about
, I don't know. One of the criticisms I
have, for example, is a lot of positive
psychology research uh will say that an intervention made people
happier. And what they will do is they will
count uh an improvement in scores on the BD I
two, the beck depression inventory, which is kind
of the, the gold standard test. But if
you go to a doctor and say, I think
I am depressed, they may give you this.
Um So the BD I is 21 items and each
of them is scored 0 to 3. And the
idea is that uh uh we can say normal,
we're allowed to say no normal person and a healthy
person will typically respond zero to almost all of them
. Because if you actually read the questions, even
, even level one, even a level one answer
is like, wow, that's, that's somebody you
might say is quite often, quite sad, et
cetera. Um And a typical score out of 63
possible on this in a normal healthy population is about
three or four. So there are about three items
out of 21 that a normal person might endorse.
Um and a a at the first level. And
in order to qualify for a diagnosis of mild depression
, you have to score 14. Um which,
and if you read it, if you read the
BD I, and, and if you yourself have
no experience of mental illness or depression, uh and
you think, you know, if I was endorsing
14 of those, most people, I think who
have no experience of men would go God, if
I was endorsing 14 of those, I'd, I'd
feel pretty bad. You have to get to 14
to be mild depression, then there's moderate and then
there's severe with even higher scores. Now, quite
a lot of positive psychology studies will go out and
, and recruit people. And the whole point of
positive psychology is, it's the psychology of people who
are not depressed and who just want to sort of
do a bit better in life and they will measure
their BD I scores and they'll get a mean of
4.2 and then they'll do this whatever psychology, positive
psychology intervention and the, the mean will be 3.8
. But I don't know what, what is the
difference between 4.2 and 3.8 when to even be mildly
depressed, you have to be 40. Why are
we measuring at this, you know, ridiculously low
end where, you know, nobody is in any
sense depressed. And we're saying, well, they're
, they weren't depressed before and now they are very
slightly more not depressed. I don't think that that
necessarily constitutes a good measure of whether people are uh
experiencing well-being and something I learned as I went along
, particularly on my master's course. But, but
other uh talking to other people is that a lot
of people who are studying positive psychology are actually quite
depressed, but they are, it seems to me
and this is, this is an opinion and a
judgment, a lot of people who are attracted to
positive psychology are kind of in denial about being depressed
and think that if they could just be a bit
happier, whatever that would mean that they would be
no longer depressed. So then the question is,
is depression the opposite of happiness. And psychologists have
been arguing about that for years, are positive emotions
qualitatively different from negative emotions or are they just uh
you know, plus and minus versions of the same
thing and emotions researchers don't agree about that. So
it, it seemed to me that a lot of
it was um it was ostensibly aimed at making people
who were not depressed happier, but a lot of
the people who want to. Oh, I really
, it would be so much, the world would
be so much better if people were a bit happier
, were really, to some extent talking about either
themselves or their, their depressed friends or, or
whatever, because a lot of people get into psychology
, either to understand their own problems or the problems
of the people immediately around them. Um, and
then the other side of it was, if it
wasn't about that, the problem was, it was
very kind of, it seemed very suburban and middle
class American. Uh, it seemed like it was
an ideal vehicle for selling you books for 2499 and
improve your well-being courses for 4 99 99 for 10
episodes. You know, and you can keep the
podcast, you can keep the MP3 file for a
week, that kind of thing that it, it
, it was very, very easy to be skeptical
about it or to be cynical about it in terms
of somebody's making quite a lot of money out of
it. Mhm. And I kind of have this
naive view of science that science ought to be kind
of free. Mm. Um, II, I
, I'm not against capitalism or industry or anything like
that but basic, a scientific finding should be,
uh, you know, if you, if you've
discovered a truth about the universe, I don't think
that's really something you should be able to kind of
patent and license and make money on and, and
, I mean, this is a problem throughout psychology
is that, uh, a lot of the measures
, I don't know, I don't know if the
BD I is one of them, but a lot
of the clinical measures you have to pay, you
have to pay some psychologist 20 bucks to administer this
scale to a patient. And it's like, well
, it's, is it a pharmaceutical thing? Have
you manufactured anything? Just, I, I don't
know, uh, who paid for the research that
discovered it? You know, if the NIH funded
it and you discovered it and now you're selling the
result for 20 bucks, how much of that is
going back to the NIH? So, I don't
know, I think there are, I, I
just found that there were all kinds of, of
, of those kind of issues which everybody in psychology
seemed to think was completely normal. So maybe,
you know, maybe I was wrong but I had
the impression that this was, this wasn't how I
thought science was done. Mhm. And I guess
we'll come back to some of these issues later on
. When, toward the end of our interview,
we'll talk about bad science and what I guess motivates
it, et cetera. But uh I would like
to ask you now about a piece of work that
you yourself critiqued coming from. Uh I hope I'm
pronouncing the name correctly. Leu Bomi at all.
I mean, their a happiness pie. Well,
I mean, what is, what were they really
working on? There, what is these or what
was this happiness pay really about? And what would
you say were the issues with it? Well,
the way I read it now is that in the
early days of the Positive Psychology movement, which was
kind of launched with a bang by a bunch of
psychologists saying, you know, we're mad as hell
and we're not gonna take it anymore. We want
people to be happier. We're not just going to
be about, you know, depression. And um
it's, it was kind of a pa it was
a paper that kind of positioned the idea that people
have a substantial amount of control over their levels of
happiness based on what they choose to do. And
so it took a very, it made it,
it, it took what we know about the,
the extent to which your t trait happiness is genetically
determined. Uh And when we say genetically, not
just, you know, genes and your uh uh
interaction with the environment and they sort of said it
, that's about 50%. Now, it's probably a
bit higher than 50% but that wasn't really the big
issue. And then they said, and your life
circumstances only account for about 10% of your happens.
Uh And they added the 50 the 10 got to
60 subtracted that 60% from one and said, therefore
, 40% of your happiness uh is um you know
, you can change, you can make a difference
to your happiness. And this is conceptually not very
good. Uh First of all, these are all
population level things. They don't tell us anything about
individuals. But by far, the biggest problem was
it is absurd to say that people's happiness is only
influenced to 10% of the variance in happiness will be
explained by life circumstances. Uh If you look at
um you know, the, the, the countries
that are the happiest in the world on that one
item, how happy are you survey that comes out
every year? Denmark scores 7.9. Syria scores 2.4
. Um It does that mean. Yeah, so
one of them is now, how should we just
say one's one's multiplied by three to get the other
? Let's do that. Let's naively say that people
in Denmark are three times happier than people in Syria
. Um Is that because the people in Syria are
not, you know, listening to the right kind
of music that they really like or, you know
, they, you know, they just need to
kind of get some kind of lifestyle makeover. Is
there maybe something else about living in Syria about the
circumstances of living in Syria uh that make people less
happy? Uh And, and you can even,
you could look at this, for example, with
Greece, where Greece went from scoring like 5.9 I
don't know the numbers off the top of my head
, but basically between 2005, 2014, the whole
Greek financial crisis, the Greek scores went from about
5.9 or something to about 4.2. So Greeks became
40% less happy. Now, was that because they
stopped going to the gym or did something else happen
in Greece? That? And so it turned out
that circumstances have an enormous effect. And so I
went and dug into what was the source for this
claim. And it turned out to be um some
studies of Americans. First of all, everybody in
the survey was Americans. So the circumstances that they
were looking at could only have been circumstances that are
common to Americans. So there was no, there
was nothing in there about, have you got clean
drinking water? Uh Do you live in a,
you know, in a democracy because everyone had that
in common. But secondly, also if you actually
looked what they call um life circumstances, there were
just half a dozen demographic variables. They didn't in
the studies that they were quoting the what they was
not a full investigation of people's life circumstances. So
basically, it was a hand waving reference to research
that didn't show what they said it showed. And
the net result was, they said only 10% is
due to circumstances. Therefore, the other 40% is
available for you as an individual um to, to
alter. In addition, while the paper itself had
one or two hedges about about this and, and
not enough, it certainly didn't combine the variant in
an appropriate way. But nonetheless, it kind of
acknowledged that these, he um Lubomirski then wrote two
books, uh particularly the first one, which was
the How of Happiness, which had a picture of
this happiness pie. So the pie was the pie
chart. 50% gene genetic, 10% circumstances, 40%
you can improve your happiness. Um And you know
, she actually wrote things like that. 40% is
yours to guide. You know, you, you
the reader, you, the individual reader forget the
fact that our study even had it been done correctly
, would have been talking about a decomposition of population
level variants in the popular book which, you know
, is signed off on by Doctor Levski and nobody
else, it says this is yours to guide and
that is simply deceptive, that is simply deceptive because
the, the paper itself, even if the paper
were absolutely true. And I mean, this is
another problem we have with popular science where we,
we publish one study and that then becomes the total
truth that we can build huge narratives around in a
, in a what I call glad well, organization
process. But even if that were the case,
that isn't even what the paper said. Mhm.
And, and, and, and so that,
that, that, that, that paper is part
of, um I think we're obliged to think of
words that, that remind you of the phrase military
industrial complex. So, I don't know if we
say psychological marketing comp um complex, but it's part
of the uh the airport book world in which a
top scientist from a top university shows you how you
can hack your life with real science. Tm.
And then when you go and look at the real
science. Tm. Um, it's somewhere between,
uh misrepresented, wasn't very good in the first place
or outright fraudulent in a great many of the cases
. Mhm. A and something that you reference there
was this sort of global happiness surveys that we get
from time to time. I mean, how much
useful information do you think we can really get from
them in terms of actually uh trying to understand if
people in a particular country and then comparing across different
countries are really happier or sad. It's difficult because
so this is, we're talking about a thing called
the World Happiness Survey that there are others. But
the, the big one is the World Happiness survey
. And basically it's, it's done once a year
and they go and ask people a one item question
and it's uh on, on a, on a
ladder where zero is the worst life possible. And
10 is the absolutely ideal life you could lead.
Where are you? So it's actually about life satisfaction
. But life satisfaction versus happiness for the purposes of
this conversation, I think we can treat it as
the same. And what happens is um well,
there are several narratives that get repeated every year.
One of them is that the Scandinavian countries are happiest
in the world and they usually are usually uh Norway
, Denmark, Sweden and Finland will. Uh Finland
is not a Scandinavian country. Please don't write in
listeners um will come out in the top four of
the top five and everyone will say, oh,
these co well, you could argue they're kind of
one country, they're all fairly homogeneous culturally. Again
, please don't write in. But, you know
, uh and so if, if tomorrow Norway,
Sweden, Denmark and Finland got together and said,
we are going to form the Nordic Union, you
know, maybe including Iceland and the Faroe Islands.
Um uh We could, they would be one country
and all of a sudden three others would move into
the top 10 cos one of the problems with the
top 10 countries is that countries are a pretty arbitrary
way of defining the world. You know, you
might find that the Marshall Islands, you know,
ev if everyone in the Marshall Islands, sort of
, you know, that if they only interview 50
people and they all say nine, go, oh
my God. The Marshall Islands are the happiest country
. Let's all rush to the Marshall Islands and find
out what they're doing. You see this with education
uh a few years ago, uh um Sweden was
top of most of the education leagues and everyone had
to go and say, oh, what are we
? We should copy the Swedish model and the New
York Times and all those papers would have a thing
to say. Here's what daily life looks like in
a Swedish school and, you know, compare that
with the US. And then one year Finland came
top. Finland got like half of, half of
, yeah. 0.01 ahead of Sweden. Uh oh
my God. What are the Fins? And it
turns out Finland and Sweden have very different education systems
. But now we all have to sort of say
, oh, we, and we've gone to,
you know, various journalists, got a, you
know, uh um flights to Lapland round about Christmas
with their kids, interviewed a few school teachers.
Yeah, there's, and the Finnish model in Swedish
were both completely different, but they were both in
all. So there is this element and any time
you see a top 10 list of countries, it's
immediately meaningless because there's nothing wrong with being the fifth
best country out of 100 and 93 un member countries
. You're probably doing pretty well. Mhm. You're
probably doing pretty well. So one of the narratives
is that Finland is fantastic. Therefore, we should
all embrace social democracy. Capitalism is bad. The
US and the UK are generally about 13th or 14th
. But because we decided to look at the top
10 and Australia's usually in there as well. Australia
is, you know, this is capitalist a country
as, as the US or, or, or
the UK. So there, it, it basically
enables people to tell stories. Then you can say
, oh, last year the US was 13th,
this year it's 16th. That must be due to
Trump or that must be due to Biden or that
must. Nah, it's just, just, just
sampling error. These countries are all, people are
all going 7.97 0.8327 0.841. You know, th
this, this doesn't mean that something radical happened now
. Yes, if your country goes from 6 to
4, like what happened to Greece, you might
go. Hm. There's a problem, but we
didn't need the World Happiness Survey to tell us that
there was a problem in Greece. So it didn't
add anything. We would have been amazed if it
hadn't, if they hadn't got less happy. If
, if, if Greece had had the same numbers
in 2014 as 2005, we would have gone.
They're pretty resilient people. Their country's been completely buffered
about unemployment, went up to whatever it did.
You know, the ATM S weren't working. So
that's the, the, the first problem is if
it, if any change, any small change is
likely to be noise and any big change, you're
gonna already know about anyone. The other problem is
it doesn't take into account the fact that culturally,
well, how you answer a question on the scale
of 0 to 10 is going to be quite different
. Um, if I can be a stereotypical brit
for a moment, it's quite hard. At least
the, the view that people have of the Brits
is they're not likely to say 10. Um,
there is this, you know, and again,
this, this may be a stereotyping. I am
a brit. So it's not racist but, you
know, this could be a thing. Oh,
yeah, they're quite money. And whereas one might
imagine that the American, yeah. USA number 110
, I'm 10. And you can invent all kinds
of stories around that about why people might say 10
and, and what their culture has to say about
when you're interviewed in the street by somebody and you
don't know them and et cetera, uh you can
imagine that in some nondemocratic countries that perhaps people are
, um, might be less happy than they say
they are. But want to know, you know
, it's like, oh, ok, who's,
who's asking? Oh, you're not from the government
. Well, that's what someone from the government would
say. I'm 10. I'm very happy with our
comrade leader. So, you know, all of
those things now that you can kind of compare year
on year, I guess. But as I say
, the small changes are gonna be noise and the
big changes you're probably gonna predict to them anyway.
So essentially it's a way of it provides fodder for
filling column inches uh in newspapers and that may not
have been the intention. And maybe there is some
serious social science that can go on behind that.
But by and large it, it's like university rankings
if you, uh if you sort of, uh
even big countries tend, I don't know whether Portugal
does it, but big countries, you have a
thing, like what are the best universities and what
will happen is um they rank you on about 25
considerations. And so even if you are the 84th
best university overall, on some measure that we don't
know. But let's, you know, uh,
Paul Meal, the great psychologist talked about someone called
omniscient Jones who knew the actual value of the parameter
. Uh, and, uh, let's say your
university is actually the 84th best out of 100 in
the country. It's probably going to be in the
top 10 on one of those measures. And so
you could put, you know, university of wherever
we're in the top 10 on, um, student
experience brackets, outdoor sports or something like that.
And if you aren't in the top 10, you
will have gone, you will have improved 25 places
on one of these measures and you go, the
results are out, we improve 25 places on student
experience, indoor sports. Congratulations. Every, everybody
and, you know, all have won and all
must have prizes. But guess what? People are
still applying to Oxford and Cambridge. Yeah. No
, you know, that this is also funny because
uh uh it came to mind that uh also sort
of loosely related to this happiness surveys. Then of
course, you can also market and sell those books
where people find uh culture, uh uh some sort
of culturally contained, let's say a concepts surrounding the
lifestyle and happiness. Like for example, in Japan
, the Iki guy and in Denmark hike or,
or h or however you pronounce it and, and
then, oh my God, you just have to
do this and you will be happy forever. And
then, and so you spend two years buying all
the ike guy stuff and then that doesn't work.
So then you go and buy all the hugger shit
and then you buy whatever the Swedish stuff is and
you've got this house full of crap. Um Yeah
, I mean, the point is that a lot
of people have outsourced their thinking about their happiness to
experts and while that's a sensible thing to do on
things like, um you know, cancer and blood
pressure, um I, I would argue personally and
II, I never thought about this until I got
into psychology. But I mean, why do we
even, why do we have psychiatrists? Why,
you know, why do we have psychiatrists for many
conditions that are really just about being human? You
know, obviously, if you have some kind of
neurological disorder, uh if, and, and you
know, I'm sure things like schizophrenia and things like
that have some kind of biological basis. But uh
we've, we started off with that and then we
kind of ended up medicalising everything and, and it
, which is ironic, cos um positive psychology likes
to think that it's not about the medicalization of everything
. But uh though II I um bit of a
plug, but it won't sell many copies. I
edited a book on which we call critical positive psychology
. And there was an excellent chapter in there saying
, well, positive psychology claims to reject the medical
model, but look what they're doing. And in
fact, you know, part of the medical model
is I am an expert. You're not. If
you give me some money, I will treat you
. And again, I don't have a problem with
that with the person who, you know, fixes
my cardiac arrhythmia. But uh so I think a
lot of people imagine that they must, they don't
, they know that they don't know very much,
you know, nobody knows very much about it.
Even the kind of philosophers of happiness over the years
acknowledged they didn't really know much about it. But
we imagine that there must be experts that we can
, if we can just give them some money,
then they will fix that problem in the same way
that they fixed our ingrowing toenail. And um so
there is this huge market for that and, and
it, it's interesting when Positive psychology was launched,
it was very much um it was with an attack
on the people at the, the softer end of
psychology, the, the humanistic psychologists because, and
it blamed them for the fact that the all the
self help books are about, you know, the
secret and your inner child and, you know,
assorted bullshit. Uh And, but there was an
element of jealousy there in that, uh those books
sell and make a lot of money and, and
most of the leading positive psychologists have one or two
New York Times best selling books based on their research
and the research of their fellow uh positive psychologists.
And the research isn't always all that great. And
then at that point, how much of a difference
is there? Um particularly because, and I think
this is a studying also in, in, in
psycho a wider psychology. There's a certain kind of
psychologist that you meet. When you go to a
psychology faculty, there are the ones who are absolutely
interested in, in measuring this and cognitive performance and
, and, and the determinants of depression. And
then there are others who've basically got a theory that
they want the world to listen to and they're in
order for the world to listen to them. OK
, I've gotta go and dig up some data,
but they're, they're not kind of going into the
lab every morning in full Richard Feynman mode trying to
, trying to disprove their theory. Um These people
tend to be quite charismatic, they tend to do
good presentations. Um, and they're clearly on some
kind of mission, excuse me. And now if
sometimes that gets attacked as, you know, some
sort of lefty socialist mission or occasionally, you know
, even some right wing mission on intelligence and things
like that. But in general, it's not really
a political thing. It's much more a sort of
be in their bonnet that they're right, they know
that this is, you know, a solution and
often they've come to that out of a very sincere
desire to confront either their own issues or issues in
their family. Um You know, I want to
know, I um people who research suicide, for
example, a lot of people who research suicide have
a, you know, sibling or parent who,
who kill themselves and it's very difficult, it's incredibly
difficult to critique suicide research. You know, a
lot of suicide research is terrible but you can't,
it's very hard to go to suicide research and say
stop doing this and be well, why do you
not care about suicide? Really, really hard.
So, yeah, there is, it seems to
me there are a lot of, of, of
psychologists whose they're more about the communication about the ideas
than they are about the scientific side of it that
, you know, treating it as if it was
uh a biomedical science where you collect data and do
the analysis and draw the graphs and say, look
, this is, this is really happening. Um
, and I, I don't know, I,
if people are watching this, who work in psychology
departments, they may be nodding along going. Yeah
, I have colleagues who, for whom the research
is kind of secondary, not in any sort of
fraudulent way, but they are, they're kind of
special people, not in a science nerd, kind
of a way. Um, you know, they
may be very spiritual individuals, et cetera and that's
great, but it's quite difficult to be very spiritual
, to be a really, really, really good
psychologist. You have to be extremely good at maths
and extremely good with people. That's, that's a
rare combination of skills. Uh So I I mean
, it seems that there's also this sort of element
of uh potentially getting some social and moral backlash if
you're trying to critique some of these research, you
mentioned suicide research there, for example, I mean
, so some of these research when it comes to
particularly very sensitive social topics is sort of v from
criticism. Well, also because the majority of people
who research, let's say a politically sensitive topic typically
start out from a political point of view on that
. So the majority of people who research police racism
start off, I think from the point of view
that there is a lot of police racism. Um
the majority of people who look for race differences in
IQ probably start off from the idea that certain groups
are less intelligent than others um, and most people
, yeah, you're not going to go into that
topic unless you're somewhat motivated to do it. And
so if it is a political topic, you're probably
going to have an, a priori political position.
Now, maybe there are people who go along and
have epiphanies, uh, along the way. But
it's very difficult when you come to, um,
an entrenched, when you come with a, you
know, an entrenched a priori political position. It's
very difficult to, to accept, um, contrary
, uh, empirical evidence. Um Michael Shermer had
a book called Why People Believe weird things. And
one of the things he said is, uh,
people believe or smart people. They, well,
one of the chapters is why the smart people believe
weird things. And he said, well, the
thing is smart people are very good at unders justifying
why they believe the weird things in the first place
. But they've still got to get the weird things
kind of out of it. If you look at
smart people who are very religious and, and who
are religious in the religion of their parents, you
know, we all, you know, we're pretty
, we all know that the chance that the religion
of our parents is the right one. You know
, certainly any sort of, you know, anyone
with a logical and scientific brain should realize that any
, that the chance that the religion that your parents
happen to inculcate in you is the right one.
It's fairly small. Um And then, but you
see, you know, orthodox Jewish, orthodox Jewish
particle physicists who are kind of discussing the, you
know, the finest points of detail in the world
. But they uh uh I, I saw one
such person being interviewed but she wasn't mixing pans with
like milk and meat or something and, and,
you know, ditto for any other religion. Certainly
not to um say anything about the uh uh Jewishness
. But if you're going to be have that,
if you're going to say, as I, as
a scientist, I am, you know, objective
about the, you know, oh, and by
the way, I have this corner with religion,
which I mean, maybe they try to defend with
the religion objectively. But I think most people who
are religious will say, ok, that's outside the
, that's outside that box. Um You're already kind
of, to some extent justifying why you're, you
know, you're not looking at that. I,
I'm not certain if I'm making quite good sense here
. But, um, people are, yeah,
people justify themselves into that position and, um,
it's hard to get out of it and it will
take a lot more, um, it'll take a
lot more co contradictory evidence before you start believing the
opposite of your initial hypothesis, particularly if it was
the entire basis of you going into that field in
the first place. Uh Very few people make that
transition. I'm thinking of um Hilda Bastian, a
science writer. And she started off as I think
she may have been anti vaccine, she was anti
something. Um it may have been anti vaccine,
anti some kind of medical procedure. Uh and she
went and read the evidence and she realized that the
evidence was actually true. And now she writes about
um deniers, well, first of all about bad
scientists, which is great, but also from the
point of view of someone who's, you know,
started off believing a lot of bad science. Um
And she's an absolute beacon from that point of view
because she actually did the, she crossed the line
, she crossed the line and will, I'm sure
would tell you, interview her, do interview her
Hilda Basket. She'd be a fantastic interview. She
would tell you. Uh Yeah, you know,
I used to believe this and here's why and most
of us who've been, most of us have been
lifelong. Most scientists have been lifelong scientists. We
haven't had to undergo that conversion. We can't tell
you what it was like the day when we realized
that Chem Trails couldn't be real. Um So people
who've been through that journey, I think uh uh
but they are, they are few and far between
and, and even more. So when you've made
a public position and when you're, you've got a
book deal, you know, you, you've got
a book deal, you've maybe you might have written
two or three or four popular Bestselling books on YX
is the way to lose weight, become happy all
of that. And even if just in those moments
before the, before you fall asleep, you have
a little bit of a doubt, you're probably not
gonna co um phone your publisher and say Pulp the
lot. I just realized it's garbage. Yeah.
So uh uh still on the topic of well being
, I would also like to hear a little bit
about your critique of another study in this case by
Frederickson at all, uh uh uh work on the
relationship between genomics and well-being because at a certain point
there, you also mentioned that, I mean,
there could be, or there might be some sort
of genetic basis to this to some extent. But
in the, in the, in the case of
that particular study, what would you find as the
main a conceptual and statistical? Yeah, this was
, this was quite the, this was quite the
uh quite the study. Um Frederickson presented it at
a conference with a um a picture of a couple
of the charts, one of them going one way
and one of them going the other way for the
, the two conditions. Uh And the uh the
title of the slide was an objective basis for moral
philosophy question mark which um there, there were two
main problems uh with this study and I presume you'll
put the reference in the notes. Um The first
was that it was it was about the sixth or
seventh study that the s last author had produced,
using a way of analyzing uh data which is completely
invalid. He basically made up his own statistical method
and this method is going to lead to large numbers
of false positives. Uh And I, I've cried
, I predicted another paper where someone had done something
similar and they, and they replied, but we
replicated it. It's like, yes, because your
, your method reliably produces large numbers of false positives
. Um So that was the, the first problem
is the method was nonsense. Um An even bigger
problem, however, was that when they were coding
up the data, uh they decided that they,
they collected data on people with this rather strange American
way of collecting race. So uh Amer the the
US US scientists used the census definition of race from
about 1910. And in the 1910 US census,
there was black, white, uh native American Asian
, which kind of meant Japanese immigrant, uh Hawaiian
and Pacific Islander. Now, clearly those are not
, you know, in any way representative of,
of, of, of the human population. But
OK, there was Hawaii and there was Guam.
So we kind of had to include them. There
isn't, for example, a code for Hispanic and
Hispanic is orthogonal to race and you can be black
Hispanic or white Hispanic. So uh and nobody dares
touch these now because obviously to try and re you
know, reconstruct that would be just a political nightmare
. Anyway, they collected these data and either they
didn't get a significant result, but for whatever reason
, they decided to recode them as white and not
white. So instead of white being one and all
the others being 23456, they just had uh white
is one and everything else is zero. And they
must have done this by hand because they left a
four in. So they had all these ones,
all these zeros and a four. And they then
used that without noticing as a binary variable in a
regression. And basically, if they held all ones
and zeros, it wouldn't have mattered if they'd been
ones and zeros or fours and twos. But as
soon as you have three values for what should be
a binary variable in your aggression, they actually start
behaving like real numbers. So we discovered this and
we found that. So again, let's pretend that
the method isn't full of statistical artifacts. Let's pretend
that the method is correct. Even with that method
. When you corrected this incorrectly coded person, the
main effect of the study reversed. Hm. Did
it reverse or did it halve or both? Anyway
, it was drastically altered simply by changing that one
data plot. So we wrote this up in our
rebuttal. And what happened was the authors. So
we said to people, but if you download this
file from this gene database and you run their code
. This is what will happen and look, here's
that form. The authors took that data file,
corrected the four and re uploaded it. They didn't
tell anyone, they didn't put a note on it
. They didn't tell us and they didn't tell the
journal. So now anyone who downloads it will go
. Well, what's this brown sl what are they
talking about? The results are? Um So yeah
, a combination of the method was completely wrong and
there were errors in the data. Um And so
the whole thing was just nonsense, just complete nonsense
. Uh But you know, it took quite,
it took, it took many, many hours and
days of dredging through. You know, the data
file is like 35 megabytes or something. It's complete
genomic analysis and then all these variables that go along
with it. So, yeah, the method was
wrong and they hadn't even implemented the method correctly.
Uh We wrote to the editors and said, we
really think you ought to retract this paper. It's
based on, you know, we can argue about
whether the method. Yeah, it, it is
full of artifacts. Here are several statisticians who will
tell you it is. But OK, that's a
scientific argument. But the data had this error in
it and when you correct it, the, the
effect goes away. Um And the authors tried to
sneak a new version of the data past you and
the um the editor refused to uh to consider it
. So when he got fired a couple of years
later for some me too stuff, uh, I
, we were, I was quite pleased. But
, um, yeah, so that's, and,
and that was an interesting example but an entirely typical
example of how science doesn't get corrected because in the
same way that if you've got a theory and you're
committed to it, it's embarrassing to come back for
it. It's very embarrassing for a journal edit to
, to admit that they published a, a garbage
paper, uh, with, with data errors in
it that, that completely trashed the results. So
they just pretend it didn't happen and hope no one
will notice. Mhm. But, but when it
comes to the statistical analysis that were applied in this
particular study, since we're talking about genetics here,
do you find that perhaps some of the issues would
also extend to other genetics research or you'd have to
talk to a genetics researcher? Um, I do
know that, um, about 15 years ago there
were problems because people were attempting to identify which gene
was responsible for this or that phenomenon, uh,
by basically, uh testing 35,000 genes, uh,
and seeing which of them were associated with an outcome
without making the necessary statistical corrections. And so they
were generating huge amounts of, um, of,
of false, false positives. But you'd have to
talk to somebody who knows a lot more than me
about genetic research. I, I had to do
quite a lot of learning in, in quite a
hurry for that paper and I've forgotten most of it
now. OK. So let's move on from uh
happiness and well being here because I, I would
also like to get into another paper, this one
from 2015 by Thorstenson Pastor and Elliot. Where,
I mean, uh th this is very interesting and
funny in a way, I guess they sort of
offered evidence from two experiments that perception of colors and
in this case, it was on the blue,
yellow axis was impaired if the participants have watched the
sad movie clip. Compared to part, if you're
feeling blue, you can't see blue or something.
Yeah. And this was compared to participants who watched
clips designed to induce a happy or neutral mood.
So, what were the main issues, methodologically speaking
here? Um I, I, I've always been
surprised that that, well, I mean, I
presume this, I think this is done with undergraduates
. I've always been surprised that um undergraduates who have
been watching four hours of TV, since per day
, since they were four years old. Um So
they've probably watched 20,000 hours of television. And apparently
psychologists believe that if you show them a mildly sad
or a mildly funny clip for about six minutes that
they will all of a sudden be in some kind
of, you know, happy or sad mood.
But apparently we have to stipulate that we have to
accept that um the bigger problem in this study is
that the uh the results were fabricated. So uh
there's not really a lot of point in going any
further. Um The editor of the adjourn at the
time is a terrifically nice chap. And he didn't
want to get into too much of a confrontation with
the authors. So um a suitable fig leaf was
arranged in terms of the reason for the retraction,
but it's, it was abundantly obvious if you looked
at the data set that these numbers had been fabricated
. Um So obviously, you can get any result
you like if you just make them, make,
make, make them, make the numbers up.
Um So yeah, that was, that was nice
and simple. That was a, that was probably
the first case I worked on where I actually had
data in front of me. And I go,
yeah, this is obvious fraudulent. Yeah. Uh
And so uh from the same year actually, and
we're talking about this sort of thing nowadays, I
guess with Twitter and other kinds of social media.
So there was also this study on how supposedly through
Twitter language, uh the authors could reliably predict heart
disease. And this was um I mean the name
here is a bit complicated. I stabbed by it
all. Yeah. So what, what are the
criticisms here? And by the way, do you
think that they would extend since I'm mentioning uh the
uh the fact that we still talk a lot about
how much reliable information we can get from uh,
patterns of language and other sorts of activity on social
media. Uh, ab about this or that kind
of issue that we can. So, do you
think that these would apply to other research using Twitter
or other social media? They, no, I
mean, everything's far too noisy. They were just
, they, they, they ran enough models so
that eventually they managed to model some noise down to
a P value of 0.049. Um And if you
get 0.05 someone will publish it. Uh And uh
they, it, yeah, they, there were
all sorts of things wrong with that paper at one
point. They were, they were using some reference
data. Uh but it turned out that was from
Facebook, not from Twitter. And, you know
, Facebook and Twitter populations are different. Um They
showed a map of, you know, this area
is close, it looks like that area and it
, it wasn't, there were hundreds of differences but
it was kind of visually impressive. Um And,
you know, basically, uh uh what I was
saying earlier, there are someone, the uh the
couple of the people on that paper have this idea
that you can with machine learning or with big,
big linear models d discern trends in extremely noisy data
. And the answer is you can't, and you
know, they, they didn't realize that their data
had been censored somewhat by Twitter. So they thought
they were getting pure data. Uh, Twitter had
taken out a lot of stuff. So this was
about the claim of the study was not that angry
people get heart disease. The claim of the study
was that US counties where there was more anger expressed
on Twitter had higher rates of heart disease, which
would typically be among non Twitter users. The data
were from like 2011 and 2012 when there weren't that
many people on Twitter and the kind of people uh
who get, uh who get uh atherosclerotic heart disease
uh tend not to be on Twitter anyway. But
you had this idea of an, you know,
an angry county full of, I don't know,
rednecks, whatever. Uh And it turned out,
yeah, Twitter was censoring the data. So there
was all kinds of anger related stuff uh in the
data that wasn't in, that wasn't in, wasn't
there that wasn't given to them because Twitter bowdlerized uh
the data, they took some of the rude words
out. Um Then I showed that if you,
um if you, instead of looking for anger,
you looked for upbeat things, but that also predicted
, I can't remember if I said it predicted heart
disease or if it predicted cancer. But basically,
if you've got enough variables, you know, that
if, if anger is predicting that particular form of
heart disease, well, how many other forms of
disease did they look at and which ones did they
choose to publish? Uh So it was, it
was just a, it was just flashy nonsense.
It was flashy nonsense but it didn't prove anything at
all. Uh But the reviewers of that paper could
not possibly have understood it. I mean, I
, I have a degree in computer science and it
took me 2.5 days to download all the stuff that
I needed to get the model to run. Uh
nn none of the reviewers ran any of those models
to replicate them. So they would have just gone
. Oh, there's this big complex computer model.
Well, it must be right. Well, you
know, the model, the model could be wrong
and I have no way of knowing that, but
a big complex software model. Uh I mean,
this is a, this is a uh a more
general problem for science is that a lot of the
time, even if you trust that the people collected
the data, you're also trusting that their 12,000 lines
of code doesn't have any bugs in it. Well
, you know, your, your, your viewers
who know a bit about software, maybe uh having
a bit of a smile at that. Um And
so, you know, we ran this model and
look these numbers came out. Can we have a
publication now, please? Just, you know,
and, and as I say, we, I
demonstrate, for example, one of the things was
if you cut the new outage states in half,
the effect was only present in the north of the
United, in the south of the United States and
not the north or vice versa. Well, there's
no theoretical reason why angry people in your county,
north of, of Missouri uh would, would cause
you to have more heart disease in that county and
not in the south. And then I found two
counties in Indiana that were like next to each other
and one of them was 10 times more angry but
had half the heart disease. So there's no,
there's no useful, the, the, the the
biggest problem with that article was, it was like
claiming that somehow health authorities were going to be able
to, you know, oh, let's not,
you know, what's the best predictor of this year's
mortality from heart disease? And the answer is last
year's mortality from heart disease, um especially since uh
the determination of mortality from heart disease is what's written
on the death certificate. And it turns out there
are enormous differences in medical diagnosing practice based on local
cultural factors sometimes including whether one particular doctor had a
big influence. You know, if you're in a
uh an area with a big city hospital and,
you know, oh, for the last 50 years
ever since professor. So and so we, we
try not to say that it's atherosclerotic heart disease because
we look for these other more subtle factors or vice
versa. And So it's all of these extremely noisy
measures being thrown into a regression. Eventually something's going
to kind of pop out one side or the other
. Um, and it, you know, but
it, it's not useful. Uh But it makes
, again, it makes, it's a press friendly
story. The press likes to say, oh,
wow, pretty soon we'll be able to see whether
, you know, you're, you're likely to get
heart disease based on what, what's, what's being
tweeted in your neighborhood. Oh, wow. Gee
whiz. Um you know, sorry, predicting heart
disease was going to continue to be um difficult.
But the best basis we have for it is,
you know, what happened last year and how much
pizza you eat. So and a lot of this
is about cute, so cute stuff gets published.
The thing about, oh Feeling Blue makes you see
blue or rather not or something. Uh And all
of these articles get coverage in Huffington Post and even
in, you know, the Daily Mail and even
in the Times sometimes, um because we've got to
generate content and so psychologists to some extent can also
, or scientists and university press offices. Uh Although
my colleague, Chris Chambers had a look at that
and determined that the scientists aren't always completely. Oh
, yes. The press office made me do it
. No, no. But the press offices are
producing these, you know, stories uh and feeding
them to their friendly journalists and scientists at the university
of whatever. And then they can go, hey
, University of wherever is in the news again with
our world leading research. So it's all part of
that kind of mutually reinforcing, um, world of
, um, en entertainment, water cooler discussion.
Clicks. It just feeds that and, but it's
all nonsense. Almost all nonsense. So we can't
tell what is it? Ok. So, uh
, le let's get a little bit more into what
might be behind the bad science here. I mean
, we could have gone through some more studies that
you yourself debunked or found flaws with. But let's
get into some more general questions and issues here.
So when it comes to perhaps having a better understanding
of where bad science stems from and the factors and
do you think that uh it is better to try
to approach it at an individual level? I mean
, is it mostly about people, individuals with certain
personality or psychological traits uh having a tendency to particularly
produce fraudulent data and studies or is it more a
systemic issue? And if it's a systemic issue,
then we might get into some of the main factors
here. I mean, I think mostly it's an
, it's an interaction of the two but the,
the, the system, as it itself, the
system itself, the scientific production system um you know
, exists in an economic context and you know,
the economists, uh most of them who aren't making
their data up, but economists can tell you if
you, if you show an economist from Mars,
uh, if you describe the system in which scientific
research takes place, uh, they will tell you
exactly what's going to happen, which is that people
are gonna respond to incentives. Um, and we
, we have this idea of the scientists as the
kind of 19th century gentleman Sikh, uh, with
, you know, independently wealthy and, and dabbling
in things to, you know, to plant species
or, you know, the odd uh still,
you know, seeing if you can get chlorine gas
out of it or whatever, um uh very much
all the sort of, you know, the noble
, the noble cause of, of advancing human knowledge
. Um But first and foremost, scientists are employees
, they are working in an economic system, they
need to go home at the end of the day
and put food on the table. Um They worry
about their career, they worry about uh their visas
. If they're from another country, they also have
normal human drives and desires such as prestige, um
you know, bettering themselves, making a lot of
money in some cases and the way science is set
up makes it relatively easy if you are prepared to
be a bad actor to do that. Now,
I don't know whether there are, you know,
more sociopaths or more generally bad people in science than
any other uh domain, you know, like banking
or uh you, you quite often read out someone
the other day on Twitter. I, I had
some sympathy with them and they, they were trying
to sort of fill in their expenses from their university
and they had to jump through hoops to get$30
reimbursed. And they said, you know, it
always seems to be the university administrators themselves who've been
creaming tens of thousands of dollars a year off the
top when the scandals come to light. You know
, it isn't, it isn't the, the research
who goes to two conferences a year over claiming$40
on a taxi ride, that's going to be what
, uh, what breaks the budget. So,
but, um, people, people of all kinds
and all classes and all backgrounds are exposed to temptations
to cheat whether that's professionally financially, uh, et
cetera. And we shouldn't expect scientists to be any
different. I sort of give this analogy of,
uh, when your university, when it comes to
the end of the month or the fortnight in the
US when it comes to the end of the month
, uh, you get a payslip, uh,
saying, you know, your gross pay your net
pay after tax. And they say, and we've
sent this money to your bank account. What they
don't do is say, ok, your net pay
after tax is 3.5 1000 just go along to room
47 and take 35100 bills off the top of
the pile. They don't know why don't they trust
you. Uh And yet we allow scientists essentially without
any external supervision, certainly without any external supervision,
you know, of the kind that could say stop
, you can't do that uh to um mark their
own homework, decide themselves what numbers they're going to
present. Um And one number will get you a
book deal and the other number won't. Um you
know, that's quite a temptation. You have to
be more than averagely honest to turn down the prospect
of a quarter million dollar book deal based on publishing
or not publishing a result. Um So yeah,
we expo we, we at the top, I
mean, not, not very, not many scientists
do this, but at the top, the rewards
are very high and therefore the temptations are, are
are there. But even in the middling level,
um we see this particularly in China where, you
know, you've gotta have this amount of publications to
continue, but it happens in the West too.
It just seems to be more of a uh and
, and so people will pay somebody to write a
paper for and then they can say, yes,
I published this paper and no one's ever gonna come
along and say so tell, no one's gonna give
them a, a spontaneous Viber, no one's gonna
say so tell me about this. So this variable
moderates this and they're gonna sit there, they didn't
write it, they didn't understand it. Um So
yeah, I say in, in, in particularly
China. It's got to the point where large numbers
of people are just having papers written for them.
Uh, but all over the world you've got all
of these do, um phd candidates and post docs
desperate to keep their job, keep their visa,
et cetera and who will do what it takes.
And particularly if they're, uh, you know,
the, the boss of their lab who is pretty
much God, you know, there's no other sort
of appeal, um, tells you to come up
with, you know, data that show the right
num the right results. Well, you're gonna give
them that data or you have to leave or you
have to leave and a lot of people do leave
, they walk away from science, uh, because
they're too disgusted about what they were being asked to
do, but most of them don't blow the whistle
on the way out because the bar for doing so
is very high. The evidentiary bar for proving that
somebody committed fraud is very high. And now,
as we've seen in, in, in a recent
case, we've even got somebody credibly accused of fraud
and, and then, um, claiming that it's
malicious libel, you know, to point out that
none of these numbers add up. So, um
, it's, it, it, you're very unlikely
to get caught, uh committing scientific misconduct. And
historically, you've certainly been very unlikely to get caught
. And so if you're in a situation where you
have a choice between two options. A and B
. Uh One of them will either make you rich
or at least ensure your continuing employment and visa and
the other won't. Um, and no one will
ever find out that you cheated to get to this
result. Um It doesn't surprise me that a lot
of people do. That doesn't surprise me at all
. I think we would be, it would be
really weird if, if we discovered that no scientist
ever did cheat, we would want to sort of
bottle whatever it is. They've got cos we could
use that with every other aspect of human endeavor,
you know, politicians, et cetera. Um But
, you know, it, it's just not the
case, it's just not the case, but science
is set up and, and the popular view of
scientists is these rather aloof individuals but who we can
trust. Trust me. It's the science, it's
not me saying it, it's the science that's saying
it. I am merely the, the kind of
priest through whom the science is channeled to you.
Uh So you have to believe it and yeah,
all sorts of things can go wrong there as we
know from every, every other aspect of our society
in, in, in almost any other aspect of
our society. If people came along and said,
you know, trust me, this, this,
this would be go yeah. Right. You know
. Yeah. A and we also have to get
a little bit more into that uh idea of trusting
the experts because uh I, I mean, knowing
what we know about how sometimes we should be careful
about trusting some published science. I mean, perhaps
we have to talk a little bit about how we
really should communicate that idea to the general public.
But uh before that, let me just ask you
a little bit more about the publishing system in science
. Do you think that uh there might be some
issues with it that also play a role in how
and why? Apparently there are so many bad studies
slash papers uh published. Yes, I mean,
it, the system is clearly nuts. In the
, in the late in the early 21st century,
you would never organize the system around that. What
we have is the result of 300 years, but
certainly 50 or 60 years of repeated kind of um
optimization of a process that suits the publishers and doesn't
and suits suits the individual scientists. It just doesn't
suit the interests of science. And there is um
there is a sort of growing realization that the people
who are successful are successful cos they published a lot
and therefore they're not gonna call into question the publishing
system. It did OK, by them, uh
the people who are criticizing it are the people who
haven't yet published a lot. And of course,
the people at the top would say, well,
you're just jealous, you just haven't published a lot
once you understand the system, you know, you'll
see that it's good for you. And of course
, the people who are selected to be at the
top are the people who published a lot. So
it's self reinforcing. I mean, it, it
actually means you can't tell one way or the other
, both sides are biased, both sides are biased
or have the potential to be biased. I personally
back the people who say that the system is,
is wrong, but we should acknowledge that the people
who are saying the system is wrong are by and
large, not the people who've been through the system
. And that, that doesn't prove that the people
who are saying that it's good because they've got to
the top um uh our, our role, but
we should, you know, consider that possibility that
they're there because they were successful at publishing. So
, um you would need to have a kind of
relatively neutral external party to say, you know,
is it a question of survivorship bias or is there
something something deeply wrong with the system? I,
I think it's fairly easy to make out the case
that there's something fairly wrong with the system. Uh
But um it's, it's, it's what we all
grew up with and there's nobody, you know,
there's nobody who remembers the time before it was about
journals and impact factors and um you know, other
stuff that you shouldn't be doing. So the publishing
system, we, we've we've, the, the
sort of administrative side of academia has piggybacked onto completely
contingent features of the public trading system such as uh
uh H index and citation counts. Um which somebody
came up with one day, you know, in
someone in 1963 wrote a paper saying, how about
we count someone's H index? And all of a
sudden the H index is all that counts as a
measure of your uh academic productivity. But we didn't
, we didn't have a commission, we didn't have
a sort of 15 year scientific commission to say what's
the best way to evaluate uh research because we were
in a hurry and we needed stuff doing now and
this was handy and we'll do that and now everyone's
and, and same with um impact factor journal,
impact Factor. And so journals now spend a great
deal of their time trying to manipulate their impact factor
. Uh So for example, what's very common and
some publishers do it more than others, but it's
common is that an article will be published uh online
first and then it won't appear in the paper if
there is a paper, but it won't get proper
page numbers and a volume number uh for 18 months
. And the reason for that is that the impact
factor is measured for the five years after official publication
. So they want to hit the ground running.
And of course, it's very difficult for a paper
to get cited in the first. Um No,
I just, if Zoom has just seen me put
my hand up, yeah, I, I,
that, that's C I for you, I guess
. Um but yeah, so um what was I
saying? Yeah, so um obviously when your paper
appears it's not gonna be cited the next month because
anything that might cite it has to be written and
has to go through the pipeline. And so a
lot of journals now, for example, are,
yeah, not publishing, not putting an official publication
date and page number on an article for 18 months
. So that the moment that the clock starts,
they hit the ground running and they get kind of
impact factor juice out of that publication uh from the
start. And there are various other ways in which
the publishers uh um game, the impact factor and
we all know it's being game but nobody does anything
about it partly because there isn't really anyone to do
anything about it. So um science is not like
the Catholic church, you know, with a guy
at the top who can sort of say as of
tomorrow, this happens. Science is much more like
um uh Sunni Islam, you know, very,
very, very distributed, no hierarchy, no kind
of, you know, great hierarchy of the,
of, of the priesthood. I apologize to any
Sunni Muslims watching this. But the impression I have
is that Sunni in particular is extremely decentralized. And
so there isn't even anybody who could decide to do
this. And when you see people on Twitter saying
, well, we should do this. It's like
, well, you can't because the, you know
, the only people who could decide to do that
are the publishers and they will decide what's in the
interests of their shareholders by and large. Those that
are run for profit. And the funny, the
, the kind of tragic thing is even publishers that
aren't run for profit tend to behave as if they
are. So, for example, the American Psychological
Association is, is really one of the worst offenders
in many publishing practices, even though in theory,
it only works for the benefit of its members.
But, but I mean, uh uh related to
that, how is it? I want to ask
you this question because I mean, particularly for people
who are not associated with academia or have academia related
occupations, perhaps, sometimes it might feel very hard
to understand how this happens. But how is it
that so much bad science sometimes go unchecked for so
long because, well, first of all, so
much gets published, I mean, we, we
publish 234 orders of magnitude more science than we can
consume as, as scientists. Um, you have
a, if you work in a department, you
work in the psychology department at a large university and
you're coming in the morning and read your calling.
Oh, my paper got accepted. Oh, they'll
say congratulations. They won't read it, they haven't
got time. So there's this absolute fire hose of
publications coming at us and almost nobody will ever read
any of them. Um, so that's the,
the, we, we're just publishing way too much
. So, nobody who's likely to have a,
a particularly critical opinion is likely to read your paper
. Now, if you're in a very small area
then maybe they will. And if it's a,
you know, small but, uh, important area
, but then you're gonna read that through the lens
probably of your professional jealousies of the author anyway.
So that's another. But by and large, it's
because we publish too much, we just publish way
, way, way too much. And so,
OK, there's this paper, it says that this
modulates the imp implement of this on this. Oh
, ok. If I'm working in that I might
find it. But it's quite often you won't find
that you won't cite that paper because you remember reading
it, you'll cite that paper cos you'll be looking
for some support for your argument in your literature review
and you'll Google it and you'll read the abstract.
But one of the things that happens certainly happens a
lot with my papers is when I read papers that
cite what I've written in a, a third or
more of the cases. They actually think it says
the opposite of what I said, cos they haven't
read or understood it. They've just kind of,
you know, oh, we sh we should,
we should cite something to say. X and say
, yeah, I think that Nick Brown guy had
a paper that did it and they'll go to Google
Scholar and they'll look at the titles and they'll click
on something and they'll read the abstract and go,
yeah. Good enough Brown and whatever. 2015.
And they're either citing the wrong paper or they haven't
read, you know, they haven't read it or
they've missed the word not out or something. And
, and, and so it's, it's just being
produced in French. We say a la loche by
the bucket load, by the bucket load. And
when you produce stuff by the bucket load, that's
what happens. You know, you can't produce masterpieces
uh on a, on a production line. So
really, it starts with the fact that we're producing
way too much science. But what happened was 1945
we'd won World War Two or the Americans, you
know, we won World War two with science.
Science is good. Therefore more science is better.
And um, you know, even today, it's
quite hard for even the most kind of pro maga
people to suggest cutting the science budget. Uh But
if you know, if, if, if uh
next year you get President Trump and he decides to
cut the science budget by 90% I'm gonna be hard
pushed, I'm gonna be hard pushed to tell you
why he shouldn't because I think we have 1020 times
too many people doing science to be able to do
anything useful. We've got enormous numbers of people doing
kind of science. Busy work. I don't know
if you know the term busy work. It's,
it's, it's w when you're a kindergarten teacher it's
what you do to keep the kids quiet and do
some cutting out, do some painting, you know
, fill up some time. Um, and we
, we've got people doing enormous amounts of science,
busy work. They're not going to discover anything.
They're not using methods that are going to discover anything
. We're sort of claiming that we're training them to
be scientists, but they're not, you know,
they're not making any worthwhile discoveries and they're not going
to make any worthwhile discoveries. And it's, again
, it's not a nice thing to say to people
. I, I do sometimes have this discussion with
my fellow scientists and to my, they don't push
back as much as I, as much as I
uh expect when I say, I think we need
to get rid of 90% of scientists. Um Most
of them seem to think they'll be in the remaining
10%. Uh maybe I have very talented uh friends
. But uh it, it, we are just
doing way, way, way too much. We're
doing way too much science and as a result,
there's lots of garbage. Now, if we got
rid of the problem is if we got rid of
90% we probably wouldn't get rid of the right 90%
because, you know, when you, when you
, when you do that kind of exercise people survive
on the basis of favoritism and friendships. And,
um, but yeah, I think we do have
to give some thought to doing less science heretical though
. That is a a and, but realistically speaking
, what would you say could be some solutions here
, particularly when it comes to publishing, to really
try to avoid as much as possible. Uh Bad
science getting published. Well, to start with.
Absolutely, every paper should present the full raw data
and the every computational step that was done to get
to the results and people sort of go oh,
but what about human subjects protection and in 99% of
cases in psychology, that's just an excuse. Um
You know, absolute you, yes, if you're
doing research among politic, you know, political dissidents
in some country and their lives are in danger or
if you're dealing with highly vulnerable people, then maybe
, then maybe, then we can talk about it
, then we can have specialized journals. But the
default ought to be, you show your raw data
as a minimum to the reviewers. There may be
data that you can't publish. But the idea that
you have data that is so sensitive that only you
are allowed to see it and not your peers who
are reviewing it is like, well, what qualifications
did you go through to make you able to see
those sensitive data. Why are you allowed to know
the names of these political dissidents are not your peers
who promised to keep it quiet? The medical profession
manages this. When I go for an X ray
, you know, and the, my doctor wants
a second opinion. He sends it through. He
doesn't go. Oh, yeah. No, I'm
not gonna send it through because that other doctor might
put your, you know, might put your genitals
on the internet or something. You know, there
are punishments for that. So we, I if
I join, if I might be your peer reviewer
and you won't let you see the data, but
you're hiring and if I join your lab tomorrow,
hey, I could, I could just open the
file. So, you know, it's not like
this is nuclear secrets. This is simply a question
of covering your arse a bit. Yes. Some
stuff is sensitive but you can get away with,
oh, it's sensitive and everyone has to go.
Oh, it's sensitive. OK. Right. And
nobody goes, no, it isn't. No,
that's just bullshit because we don't like going to people
who are telling bullshit stories and say sorry. That's
bullshit in the same way when people say, oh
yeah, I sorry, I don't have the data
. I accidentally wiped the hard drive with the only
copy of the data on it. Well, that
isn't true. Nobody accidentally wipes a hard drive and
nobody who is capable of wiping a hard drive is
not also fully aware that they need to make backups
. So, what do you do when somebody makes
a claim that is completely unreasonable and everyone's laughing at
them behind their back, but nobody actually stands up
and go, mate. Seriously. No, no
, that's bullshit. We go. All right.
Yes, we have to respect professors on this.
No. Sorry. The guy is being massively disingenuous
. He probably has something to hide. Let's,
uh, look further. But we don't do that
because it's, it's still at that level. A
gentleman's club. Um, science is very much a
gentleman's club because academia works that way. Um,
you know, how do you get a university to
investigate a senior professor when they, you know,
they're godfather to each other's kids or something? Um
, you know, it's, it's very difficult.
There's a reason why, for example, um,
law enforcement people tend not to have many friends outside
law enforcement and vice versa because if you have a
good friend who is a, you know, senior
detective, he knows that there's a chance one day
he may have to bust you. Yeah. Um
, you know, the police know how many people
there are out there committing offenses of various kinds and
it's an enormous number. Uh, I, I
saw a thing, I wish I had a source
for this about 25 years ago and it was one
, it was 10 million people in the UK.
So population 60,000,010 million people have a conviction for a
conviction for something that isn't a motoring offense. And
if you assume most of those are men, that's
about one men in three. So that one man
in three has been convicted in a court of law
now, probably something minor, probably just drunk and
disorderly or, you know, urinating in a public
place or whatever it is. Nonetheless, one man
in three in the UK. And I don't see
any obvious reason why it should be vastly less elsewhere
has some kind of. And so, you know
, when you're in law enforcement, you know that
there's, there's a, there's a chance, what
am I going to do one day if I have
suspicions that Ricardo is committing fraud. Uh And so
law enforcement tends to be done separately from the rest
of society and these people tend to exist. It's
one reason why people don't always trust police officers cos
we don't really know them, we don't get to
know them. So come back to academia all of
a sudden, Professor X is accused of something and
there's a committee consisting of professors A B and C
to investigate them. It's, it's very awkward for
everybody, very awkward for everybody. So the there
is no real method by which that can be investigated
because there's no police, there's no prosecutors and the
, the bad people know that they, when if
somebody says Blimey, how did you get that amazing
result? You know, you're not gonna go,
I made the data up. You're gonna come up
with some moderately bullshit excuse. But your colleague who
you've had coffee with every morning for the last five
years is not gonna go, Nick. That's just
bullshit. What's wrong with you? Because we don't
do that with our colleagues. We just don't,
I'm sure you've come across situations in journalism where people
have just made up stories. Mhm. You know
, how do you deal with that when you suspect
that this interview? Oh, wow, great interview
with the, with the defense minister. Wasn't,
wasn't he, wasn't he in Australia at the time
? Um Should I ask about that? I'll,
I'll, I'll just keep quiet, I'll wait for
more evidence. Um And, and we as,
as a society and a society of polite middle class
, educated individuals are not very good at calling out
situations where we go, hold on is, is
, is this just all lies cos it's not something
we, it's not something we're used to dealing with
. And, and so as a result, the
bad faith people can get away with a lot because
they just exploit the fact that nobody's ever gonna ask
them. And in many cases, these are people
who have been doing this since they were Children and
they quickly learned as a child that if you develop
the right kind of um obfuscated uh sta um strategies
to deflect attention uh that, that will work.
And I'm sure you know, you knew people like
this and, you know, people like this in
your life who've gone through their lives, they're not
quite what they seem but they're pretty good at hiding
it and you get them in every walk of life
and you get science. But, uh, I
, I mean, let me ask you then a
different kind of question. So do you think that
as individual readers of the scientific literature, I mean
, as people that are interested in science, that
we can really do much to avoid, at least
sometimes giving rhythm to some bad science. I mean
, because we went through some examples here today and
at least in one of them, you mentioned how
hard it was to go through the data and the
statistical analysis and all of that. I mean,
it shouldn't we expect that uh most people or even
all of us at least now and then uh will
give grievance to some bad science and intentionally. Yeah
. No, you, you can't, you can't
uh to a first approximation, you can't. Um
And if that results in staring into the abyss,
then welcome to the abyss. Uh you can't,
you have to trust something at some point. Uh
otherwise you end up being a total conspiracy crank.
Um And so um yeah, it, it,
it gets, it, it gets pretty dark,
it gets pretty dark in places because it's like,
well, why should I trust this vaccine? You
know, why should I believe that climate change is
real and you know, I, I trust vaccines
and I believe climate change is real, but um
science is not doing itself any favors by tolerating this
kind of behavior. So, I mean, one
of the things I was involved in, in,
from about two years ago, uh was somebody who
was faking climate related research. Um She was making
out that the effect of dissolved carbon dioxide increase in
dissolved carbon dioxide, increased ocean acidification, which is
a well known phenomenon. Uh And she was making
out that the effect it was having on fish was
absolutely catastrophic and she was making all of her data
up now, that doesn't mean that the effect might
not be catastrophic, but it hands ammunition on a
plate to people who say, who go, who
say climate change is a scam. It's all being
done by researchers for grant money because in this case
, it was now, uh that's kind of embarrassing
. I don't think she was typical and, and
, and she wasn't doing research into the actual kind
of climate science. It was the, you know
, the knock on effect, but it's true that
in, um, it's certainly true that in,
in most fields of, of animal biology, for
example, uh it's a lot easier to get your
research funded if you can chick tick the climate change
box. Yeah. So, uh you know,
we're, we're not doing ourselves any favors uh by
insisting on you know, everything has to be tied
to that. But I, I, yeah,
this and then this person came from a lab which
produces a whole load of dubious research. And I
think, I don't know whether people go in there
as honest citizens and come out believing that they're making
discoveries by fabricating the data. Maybe they get on
such a kind of mission on what is an extremely
important topic that they think it's OK to fake results
. Certainly the people who blew the whistle uh on
this individual are, you know, mainstream, mainstream
biologists concerned about the impact of climate change. But
they also say it's not doing anyone any favors to
exaggerate the the impact um or to to fake data
about it. So in terms of trust in science
, yeah, for exa another example is III I
worked with some people on various fake COVID cures and
those are relatively easy to debunk because most of the
studies claiming, you know, most of the trials
claimed to have been done never took place and the
data were fake. But the same per one of
the people who was I was helping with that has
discovered that pfizer still hasn't released one of their uh
chunks of trial data that they should have done.
You know, I had my Pfizer jab yesterday,
I have reasonable faith. You know, I had
COVID, I didn't get as ill as I probably
could have done if I hadn't had the jab,
but they still haven't released those data. Come on
, come on, you know, um you know
, uh so there, you know, there is
bad behavior at all the levels, I suppose after
a while, it just becomes a question of the
overwhelming consensus. Um and particularly in reproducible sciences,
then you kind of look at the consensus. So
if someone produces a bad uh a bad paper on
, on superconductors, for example, there's always something
about superconductors. Um you'll know within three months,
if it's real cos somebody will go and try and
make the same, you know, compound and it'll
either work or it won't and that will get dropped
very quickly in psychology because the concepts are all so
kind of malleable. Uh You can always plead that
they weren't really testing what you thought, what they
thought they were testing and you can eventually the line
of research will collapse. But by then you'll have
retired, you'll have got the best selling book,
15 years will have gone by and nobody will care
. So it's, it's much easier to um to
get away with that kind of thing in, in
a, in psychology. And then in, in
, in basic biology research, the problem is that
there's so many diseases and so many genes that anyone
, a lot of these fake papers that are written
to order you just pick a gene, pick a
disease and someone will write a story saying the two
are linked with experiments that never took place, but
it's very formulaic and no one will ever test that
because the chances are that nobody's looking at that gene
for that disease every so often somebody might come along
and say, oh, I was interested, oh
, and, and I got misled by this fake
paper. But the, these fake papers mostly are
just bulking out the journals and bulking up the university's
kind of count of how much prestigious research we're doing
. But there isn't even a great danger of them
causing too much individually causing too much problem because nobody's
even gonna read them. Yeah. And, and
, and you get this rather kind of ca care
situation of, of, um, I call them
, write only papers, you know, they,
they, they're only ever written and published and nobody
ever reads them but somebody somewhere has an economic interest
in doing that. I don't know if you ever
Google, sometimes you Google for a phrase and there's
this page on the internet of complete gibberish that's been
copied and pasted from 25 different and maybe translated into
Albanian and back to English. And you go,
what even is this page doing? And there aren't
any adverts on there but there's somebody somewhere has identified
that there's a very small economic benefit to doing that
. And, and uh yeah, it, it
, it, it's like that a lot of,
a lot of what's called scientific publication is just very
, very marginal economic benefits. From somebody and that
appears to have no impact on anyone else. You
know, who is the victim, who is the
victim. If I publish a scientific paper about research
that never took place on a gene disease link that
no one else is interested in investigating who's the,
who's the victim? Yeah, it's, it's difficult
. It, how would you ever prosecute that on
what basis would you try to discipline somebody? And
if you only discover it three years later and they've
moved on to another university, the university where they
were at the time says, well, they left
the university where they are now, will say,
hey, it wasn't done at our university and,
and um a lot of fraudulent people, if you
, if you move every three years, you'll,
you, you'll essentially never get formally sanctioned for any
form of malpractice because your current university will never investigate
you for stuff at another place. And your previous
place says, hey, they moved on. That's
, uh you know, if you imagine, imagine
if you could commit actual kind of financial fraud by
moving on to a different bank every three years.
Well, but uh I mean, related to that
when it comes to the idea that we communicate to
people, and I, I still think it's a
good idea of course, when we tell people that
they should trust the experts. Uh and, and
I mean, we really do need to trust the
experts because realistically speaking, we cannot evaluate data from
all sorts of places by ourselves. I mean,
that's impossible. But uh but, but since there's
still some bad science, some fraudulent science, I
mean, sometimes I'm afraid that if we just say
without adding anything to it without adding any warnings or
nuance with uh trustee experts, then if sometimes it
happens that people know that all this piece of science
, this piece of research got published and then five
years later, it was discovered that it was just
pure fraud or something like that, that people might
get cynical and think, oh, ok, if
it works like that, then uh I will just
go like this. If it confirms my pre-existing beliefs
, then I will trust the experts if it doesn't
to hell with it. So, you know,
so how should we handle it? Well, I
I there's not much you can do about what people
, what people out there want to believe. Uh
I think the, the issue is when it starts
affecting public policy. Um and, and we,
you know, you, when you, when you
see the kind of Q and on crazies, uh
finding themselves actually getting elected to congress, et cetera
. Um And you know, there are one or
two an rabidly anti vax members of parliament in the
UK. Um But um by and large, I
think you have to sort of hope for the wisdom
of the, of the majority. I think also
the majority of scientific fraud. Is in areas that
people don't really care about. Uh It's not taking
place in, in uh the most basic stuff that
can be replicated easily and which turns into technology,
whether that's medical technology, uh or, um,
or, or computer technology that said, I think
there is a, we are approaching a point where
, for example, a lot of drug development is
now on drugs that have moderate effects at best and
whether or not those effects are real and how will
we discover if they're not? Um, so,
you know, nobody's going to doubt the effect of
penicillin, for example, but if you have a
new disea, uh if you have a new drug
for, I mean, talk about Alzheimer's, which
is in the news at the moment with two or
three stories of, of various forms of either historical
or current fraudulent research. How do you know that
an Alzheimer's drug is working? And how do you
know that it's working when it claims when the only
claim their claim is not, you know, Alzheimer's
will go away, you know, your, your
, your grandmother is going to be, you know
, playing chess at national level in three years time
. Um When the claim is that it makes significant
difference to the severity of symptoms. Uh, how
are you going to test that? Because these things
are all based on samples and averages and there's always
gonna be people for whom it doesn't work. We've
got used to having medicines that have relatively dramatic effects
. You know, we bring in a measles vaccine
and all of a sudden the number of measles cases
goes from that down to here. I mean,
you can, um, it's, it's quite easy
to hide poor science if your claim is fairly modest
. Now, normally, when claims are fairly modest
, they don't then become that important. So obvious
you get things in psychology and, you know,
we're going to reduce your back depression inventory score from
4.2 and 3.8. But people aren't rushing out to
change public policy on that basis. You know,
maybe one or two people are going to an expensive
training course they didn't need. But if you come
along and say we, you know, we're going
to reduce Alzheimer's symptoms, we're going to delay the
onset of dependency by 18 months on average. And
people are reading about this, this new drug and
you're going well, my mum, my dad is
an early stage Alzheimer's if we could have 18 months
more with them before, you know, these things
are fairly inevitable. But before the decline, how
much would you pay for that? Or how much
would you in a European context? You know,
demand that your health system pays for that rather than
shingles vaccine. I have to go for a shingles
vaccine tomorrow and it's expensive. Um And how would
we know if it was or wasn't having an effect
? And it's really quite difficult because, you know
, we do that on the basis of observation report
of the statistics and those kind of, that kind
of research is quite, is quite easy to falsify
. So I think that is historically, it's not
been too much of a problem because the kind of
gee whiz claims that have turned out to be false
, the kind of Cyril Burt, uh, things
, the, I think psychology stuff, um,
has tended to be fairly fluffy stuff. But with
one or two exceptions, uh with things like the
nudging and the, you know, signing the paper
at the top to say you'll be honest, one
or two, but it hasn't really had a huge
impact. But the, the medical stuff I'm starting
to worry about now because the claims are no longer
, you take one of these pills, it costs
$3 and, and, you know, it will
go away. We will know we, we,
the, I, they're talking now about malaria vaccines
that are 50 or 60% efficient and can be made
for, I don't know, 20$30. If
we deploy several, tens of millions of those,
we will see, we will see in the figures
that there is that much less malaria and we will
know that they work um, some of these other
drugs that, you know, with modest claim effects
, how are we gonna know if they're working or
not? It, it's very difficult because the,
you know, the whole initial claim is difficult to
evaluate uh uh uh a percentage drop of this,
you know, with what statistical techniques. And even
if the research is being done, honestly, people
don't always agree about the right way to analyze these
things. So yeah, historically, it was I
think simpler because you make, you know, you
claim you made a superconductor, nobody needs to worry
about that because in three months time, we'll either
know if it works or if it doesn't. Uh
But if you play some of the, some of
the stuff in, in the medical area is,
is and we know we know that plenty of drugs
are marketed that don't work. Mhm. Uh And
, and sometimes are worse than useless. Um And
then was that because of statistical errors in the phase
three trials or was there faking going on? Um
Yeah, difficult or, or sometimes you even get
unregulated stuff like supplements, for example. Uh Yes
, but at least no one's, I mean,
no one's hopefully taking some of the those claims seriously
. But I was talking this morning, this is
someone on Twitter about there's this drug that makes you
apparently lose weight quite effectively. I forgot its name
. I think we V is one of the brand
names. And so what's happening now is people are
buying a fake version of it over the internet because
everyone read about it. Let's assume the research is
genuine and that the, the drug is great.
The pro the problem is the drug's quite hard to
get, you have to get it prescribed and your
doctor won't necessarily prescribe it for, you know,
something minor. Uh, and so people are going
out to the internet and buying it or at least
they think they're buying it. They're probably just getting
, you know, flour and water or something.
Uh, but to some extent that's a problem.
It, you've got a, you've got a societal
problem caused by the research on this drug that arguably
kind of isn't the fault of the people who made
the drug. But the, the press got hold
of it. You've got to get this, you
know, and, and they get whatever the 10
letter name of the drug is, you've gotta get
this and people go and type it into Google and
off, they go. Um, that's another problem
for society of, of, um, sort of
criminal derivation of, of, of, of,
of, of scientific research that we also have to
look at. So I think there's an even wider
problem of, of how do you communicate truth to
people, um, whether it's scientific truth or,
you know, political truth or, you know,
and, and then, you know, so we
, we t, I don't know it, this
is the kind of thing that we ought to be
able to ask psychologists about. It's just that psychologists
aren't very good at it as we've seen. Um
, if you look at, you know, during
COVID, um, some of the advice from the
psychologist. Well, it was based on this kind
of crappy nudging theory. Most of which I think
is probably, is probably at least at the very
least bad, bad signs and quite a lot of
it I suspect is faked. Um, but,
oh, yes, the nudging. Yes. Um
, there was a book you could buy at the
airport called Nudge. You remember that one? Well
, for example, that book, the first edition
was full of uh cute stuff by Brian Wansink,
the food research guy who then got fired by Cornell
after we showed that he'd been uh well, amongst
other things, making up his data. And uh
and then the second edition of that book came out
, but they just dropped all those references. They
didn't put a Ford say, oops, the first
edition of this book was full of bullshit about that
. Well, that all turned out to be crap
. But this stuff, you know, trust us
all the rest's really solid. They didn't say anything
at all. They just produced a new edition and
he was airbrushed out. Um You know, and
they, you know, these gu the um these
guys make quite a lot of money selling those books
and it was a bit embarrassing. So, uh
it's, it, it's a genuine problem, but
the problem is there isn't anyone who can do anything
about it. There isn't a pope, there isn't
a pope to say guys the entire scientific community,
you're stop doing this or there will be consequences.
Um So all we can, I think all we
can do is have um people like yourself holding science
to account uh and asking those awkward questions and um
you know, talking to people who disagree with me
as well, but we, we have to have
that level of scrutiny. Nothing would have happened in
the Weinstein case, for example, if Buzzfeed hadn't
, uh hadn't gone on to it, uh,
because it became too embarrassing for Cornell not to do
anything about it. Uh And uh, I mean
, actually the nudge book, uh reminded me of
, uh Dan Arielle who I guess I, I
, if I, if I'm not mistaken, even
rec just recently published a new book and iii I
haven't even read the book. But after all the
, the things that uh uh came out since 2021
about these fraudulent data and all of that, I
would imagine that probably he's still promoting some of his
fake ideas as if they were, but it's his
business model. He can't, you know, he
can't back away from that. He's committed to that
view of the world in which uh very small subtle
interventions that only he knows about, um, you
know, make a difference. And it's, it's
, it, you know, no, nobody else
reproduces these things. There's this whole thing of mindset
theory. So the mindset theory is that, you
know, students with a growth mindset, you know
, achieve better. And it's strange because this,
the claim is that any teacher, any school teacher
can go into their class and apply this. But
no psychologists have ever been able to replicate it.
So apparently it can be replicated freely by the person
who invented it, any school teacher, but no
other psychologists. Um, and, yeah, that
doesn't make a whole lot of sense to me.
Um, and the, um, the, the
naive reader would draw conclusions about that which, um
, scientists are too polite, uh, to draw
. But, uh, the, the people reading
the books aren't getting that they say, oh,
you know, I, there, there's this interesting
research, my, my colleagues and I, at
university or whatever tested this with 300 undergraduates. We
found that when we did this, they did that
come by us. But, um, you know
, did it happen? Is that what really happened
? Did they know what, you know, does
that, can, we, can we really draw
that conclusion? Probably not. But I've got a
book to sell. Um, and the, yeah
, the nudge type stuff. Freakonomics. Freakonomics is
another one. the, a lot of the,
what, what they write about, uh, is
, is studies that either never happened or certainly didn't
happen as was described. Um, but that,
again, that's that whole industry now, you know
, there's that book, think like a freak and
it's like, oh, the thing to do is
to be counterintuitive. Everything is counterintuitive and when the
problem is when you get into everything being counterintuitive,
well, then you're into Chem Trails and five G
and, and all that because, hey, that's
counterintuitive too. Um, and you know why not
? Who says that can't be possible? Um,
it, it's very dangerous, it's very dangerous.
This idea that absolutely everything is counterintuitive cos actually most
things are, you know, true on their face
. Mhm. Uh So uh ju ju just to
, to wrap up our conversation, let me just
ask you, I guess one last question. So
when it comes to lay people specifically, if they
are exposed to a paper or to a piece of
news on mainstream media about some new a breakthrough research
, something like that. I mean, do you
think that there are perhaps, or there would be
good enough rules of um even from uh for non
experts to follow where perhaps there would be some things
they should be wary of things, they should pay
specific attention to where if they see them, they
should go. OK. So this is, I
should be careful about this. This is sort of
a preposterous claim. Let me just take a step
back and perhaps wait a while to see if there
are some reviews and critiques that come out to see
how it turns out uh what experts actually we see
about it. Um I'll give a plug here for
my friend Stuart Richie's book called Science Fictions in which
he sort of, in which he, you know
, tells, gives you these steps to go through
. But, uh, I'm not very optimistic that
, that many people will want to do it because
people are, people are absorbing this on their commute
into work. You know, in the, in
the, in the, in the 20 minutes free
newspaper, a new study shows, blah, blah
, blah. Next page, somebody got mugged in
your neighborhood last night. Next page, the football
results. And it's just part of the, it's
just part of the entertainment churn. And then,
yeah, sometimes I'll be out, I'll meet people
on a walk or something and they'll say, oh
, I read that X, you know, causes
why. And it's like, hm. But sometimes
people will say, I don't believe any of it
because they're always telling you that this causes cancer and
then they're telling you that this cures cancer. Why
won't the scientists make up their minds? And I
used to say, I used to say this isn't
the scientists, this is the journalists. Uh,
but it turns out that a lot of it is
the scientists and I wish the scientists would stop doing
this. But the scientists will then say, oh
yeah, but we didn't say that, you know
, we had this study and which said that this
is associated with this in rats. Uh But they
allowed their, they allowed their study in rats to
be turned into a news item. Um, and
they might even say, oh, well, the
university press office obliged us to it. It's like
, well, you're not, not obliged to,
you're not obliged. So you can choose not to
do it. You went along with it because it
was the easy thing to do. And then they
might say, yeah, but, you know,
my university ranks people on their public impact and they
may well be right. And so on the other
hand, it is quite difficult to critique people for
their uh behavior as scientists. It, it it's
easy to critique them when they got a million dollar
book deal off the back of it. Understandable why
they would do that. But it's easy to critique
them. It's less easy to critique them when they
have a precarious contract of employment. And they sincerely
believe that going along with a little bit of the
excess of the press department is the requirement to still
have a job paying them 2000 a month or 4000
a month next year. And I think we have
to be a little bit careful about dismissing sort of
, you know, the, the incentives because we
see the results of the, you know, the
high end thing and the$100,000 consulting gigs. But
we also have to acknowledge that there are lots and
lots of people who really want to keep doing this
line of work um and who are prepared to do
what it takes to stay in that. It's one
of the reasons why I think we need to have
fewer scientists, uh is because once people are in
that system, the system owes them an honest opportunity
to keep going within that. I think if you
have any kind of uh profession that isn't casual employment
and you ask people to make a commitment to being
trained to do that profession of engineer or, or
lawyer or accountant. I think it's incumbent on that
profession, that domain of human activity to have a
reasonable opportunity for people who've made that commitment to go
for a decent length of career within that field where
they chose to give up their twenties, getting trained
. And at the moment, we have a situation
where we, we train all these scientists but there
simply isn't enough stable employment for them. And as
a result, we make them jump through hoops and
, you know, perform little tricks to stay,
um, in, uh which, which first of
all means we select for the people who are best
at doing the little tricks, but also the whole
premise was, well, we'll push all these phd
s through the system and we'll, we'll cream off
the 15 or 20% best ones. You shouldn't be
doing that. You should be selecting people much more
rigorously for their potential to be, have a good
long career as scientists. And I'm, I if
you go along to law school and you're just not
up to, you know, whatever I don't know
what the qualifications are or what. But I'm sure
there are ways, I'm sure there are people who
go to law school and after two months, you
know, people around them will realize, look sorry
, but you're never gonna make it in the law
, you know, because of the way your mind
works or whatever it is. And, you know
, hopefully, well, you failed them perhaps.
I don't know. Uh, but we, we
, we, it seems to me that in science
that is completely out of whack and we're bringing in
so many people and then they, they, they
wanna continue in what they're doing. But that's,
I think a legitimate social contract with people now who
is running that system. I don't know. But
worlds of, I don't know, don't know about
journalism but words of engineering law and things like that
when we bring you into the system, the deal
is that if you pass the exams with a reasonable
degree of competency, there will very likely be a
job for you somewhere. And that simply isn't the
case in science. Um And so I, as
I say, my, my fundamental that everything I've
told you in the last two hours, you could
have heard from a dozen other people apart from perhaps
my position that we need to train vastly fewer scientists
than we currently do. Not because the world might
not be a better place with all those scientists,
but because we simply don't have room for them.
We don't have the capacity to absorb either the people
or anything they might output. Uh, and we
just have to accept that in the same way that
we don't put, um, 20,000 kids a year
through professional football academies. Mhm. You know,
your, uh, whatever your favorite football team is
has an academy and they know they know that 90%
of the 14 year olds won't make it. 70%
of the 16 year olds won't make it. But
they don't, they could, they could take in
three times as many kids. And occasionally, you
know, the ones who they, let's say at
the moment they take in the ones who score nine
out of 10, they could take in all the
ones who currently score eight out of 10. Occasionally
, one or two of those would blossom and become
16 year olds and go on to become professional.
But the trail they would lead in there and there's
a, the cost of doing it. But there's
also, I think a certain moral obligation within that
field to say, look, the chances that he
or that this person will make it as, as
a profession are so low that we're going to take
the risk of missing out on the next Lionel Messi
because, you know, we just have to do
that. And it's, I at the moment it's
as if it's as if your local football team had
Tween took 2030 times more people than they need into
the academy. 14 year olds go, hey,
I'm at the FC, whatever academy. That's fantastic
. And, and you go, yeah, you're
not gonna, you do know it's very unlikely.
And I think we would, if that was happening
we would consider that there was an ethical, an
ethical problem. Maybe there already is. Maybe they're
already training to me. I don't know. But
we would, you know, we would be talking
about that and I, I don't think we talk
about that in, in science. I'm not certain
why or outside science, maybe that's your next kind
of investigative mission is why are we, why do
we train so many scientists? Because we have so
many professors because they were trained as scientists. You
know, we've got this, we've got this huge
machine and it has to be kept going and we
, in our society, we associate any machine getting
smaller as a sign of failure, right? You
know, why have half the psychology departments in our
universities closed? There's not going to be an article
saying actually this is a good thing, you know
, it's going to be interviews with the people who
lost their jobs and, and my, my kind
of assertion is that we shouldn't have hired a lot
of those people in the first place. But this
will, this will, this, this doesn't make
me too popular. I'm surprised that it doesn't make
me more unpopular, but it doesn't. Yeah.
No, no one's no-one's yet invited me on their
podcast to give a good, full 45 minute exposition
of exactly how I think that should work. Well
, I, it's food for thought. Anyway,
I guess let's end on that note. And Doctor
Brown, uh, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find you
when you work on the internet? So, I'm
still on Twitter and, uh, you can put
the link in cos if I try and spell it
, it'll you um you can put my Twitter handle
on there. I, I suppose at some point
I will move over to blue sky like everybody else
. Um And one or other of those uh will
be the best place to contact me. And if
not, um Ricardo, you can put, for
example, the address of my blog um in the
in the blurb and um people will be able to
find my contact details through that. OK? So
I'm leaving links to that in the description box of
the interview and Doctor Brown, thank you again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been fun to talk to you, but I,
I enjoyed it and I, I hope there's uh
I hope there's something here you can use without your
lawyers getting to uh getting too upset. Hi guys
. Thank you for watching this interview until the end
. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning and
development. Then differently check the website at N lights.com
and also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
paypal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and paypal supporters,
Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno Bernard Seche
O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting B no
Wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip Forrest
Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI Z
Mark Nevs called in Holbrook Field Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel
Andre Francis for Agns Ferger, Ken Herz J and
La Jung Y and the K Hes Mark Smith J
. Tom Hummel Sran David Wilson, the dear Roman
Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli
Nicole Barba Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stass, Nale Me
, Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and
YPJ Barboza Julian. Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franka Gilon Cortez Solis Scott Zachary, Ftw
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke
Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams Di A Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Chao Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fist
Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul
Barnabas Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson Chris
to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No,
Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man George Katis
Valentine Steinman Perros, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert
Liam Dan Biar Masoud. Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla
. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special
thanks to my producers is our web Jim Frank Luca
stuffin, Tom. We and Bernard N Corti Dixon
, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin
, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick
Golden. And to my executive producers Matthew Lavender,
Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.